(futuristic electronic music)
(keyboard keys clack)
All right, so let's implement delete for heaps.
We're gonna need a delete method and a fixHeapBelow method
for when we look down the tree
when we're doing our heapify process.
We're also going to need methods for isEmpty
and for getting the child indices
for an element in the array.
So let's add the isEmpty and getChild methods first.
So I'm gonna say public boolean isEmpty,
and basically, the heap is empty if the size equals zero,
so we're just gonna return size equals zero,
and that's our isEmpty method,
and now, we want a method for getting the children
of an element in the array, or a child anyway.
We can only get the index for one child at a time,
so we're gonna say public int getChild,
and we want the index of the parent,
so the element that we want to get a child for,
and we also need to know
whether we want to get the left or right child,
so I'll say boolean left,
and if left is true, we want the left child.
If it's false, we want the right child.
So all we're gonna do is return the result
of the expressions we looked at in the slide.
So we're gonna say return two times index,
remember, it's two times i,
and then, if we want the left child, we add one,
and if we want the right child, we add two.
So we're gonna say plus left,
if it's a left child, we want one.
Otherwise, we want two,
and so, that's our getChild,
so we want two times index plus one for the left child
or two times index plus two for the right child.
So now that we have those, let's write our delete method.
I'll put it right here, so I'll say public int delete.
We're gonna return the value that we deleted,
and we're gonna want an integer,
and we're gonna take the index, not the value.
Now, why are we taking the index?
Well, if we take the value,
then we're gonna have to search the heap
for the index of the value,
and we can do that, of course,
but we'd have to use a linear search.
We can't use a binary search
because you can only do a binary search on a sorted array,
and we can't sort the array
'cause that would obviously blow away our heap structure.
I could accept a value here,
and then, the first thing we do in the method is
a linear search, but instead, I'm just gonna take the index.
One thing to keep in mind is when you're working with heaps,
you pretty much never are going to want to just
take some random value off the heap.
You always wanna take the root off the heap,
and so, you just have a delete method
that doesn't take anything
because it's understood that you want the root,
but some implementations will support deleting
or removing any element in the heap,
and so, that's what we're gonna do here,
but when we're writing the main method code,
we'll have to keep in mind that we have to pass the index,
not the value.
Okay, so the first thing we're gonna do
is check whether the heap is empty so we'll say if isEmpty,
and if that's the case,
we're gonna do the same thing we did in insert
and just throw an exception,
so we'll throw a new IndexOutOfBoundsException,
and we'll say Heap is empty,
and that's it,
so we're not gonna worry about doing anything else.
If that's not the case,
the first thing we wanna do is get the parent,
so int parent equals
getParent index,
and so, this will be the parent of the deleted item,
and then, we wanna save the deleted value off
'cause we're gonna return that at the end of the method,
so int deletedValue equals heap index,
and so, we've got the parent of the value we wanna delete.
We've saved off the deleted value, and now,
we're going to replace heap index with
the value that's at the right-most position in the array,
and the index for that will be size minus one
because remember that size always contains
the next available position,
and so, we're gonna say heap index
equals heap
size minus one,
and so, that's doing the replacement step.
In the slides, we took 67
and used that as the replacement value.
That's what we're doing here.
So the right-most node in the heap,
right-most value in the heap,
will now replace whatever was at the index.
Okay, so at this point, we've done the replacement value,
and now, we're gonna wanna look up or down the heap,
depending on what the situation is.
If the value at heap index is now greater than its parent,
we need to fix the heap above.
If the value at heap index is less than its parent,
then we need to look at the heap below
because it's possible that it's also less than
one of its children,
and so, let's write the fixHeapBelow method
before we continue here,
and I'll put it below here,
and I'll say private void
fixHeapBelow,
and we're gonna take the index of the start position,
and that will be the index of the item that we deleted,
so where we put the replacement value,
and then, we're gonna accept this lastHeapIndex parameter.
Now we don't need this for delete,
but when we implement the heapsort algorithm,
we're going to need this,
and this basically says this is the last index of the heap.
So in our array, right now,
the heap goes from position zero to position size minus one,
and so, we're gonna pass size minus one as lastHeapIndex.
So this essentially tells us the last position
of the heap in the array.
For delete, we don't really need it,
but we're gonna use this method for heapsort.
All right, so I'm gonna declare a field called childToSwap,
and now, what we're going to do is a swapping phase.
So we're going to compare the node at index
with its two children,
and we're going to swap it, if necessary.
If the value at heap index is less than
either of its children,
we're going to swap it with the child
that has the greatest value as we saw on the slides.
So we're gonna say while
index is less than or equal to lastHeapIndex,
and so, we're going to, we're fixing below,
and so, we're starting at index,
and we're going to the end of the heap.
We're not looking at indices that are lower than index
because those are nodes that are sitting above index,
and this is fixHeapBelow,
and so, we're gonna say int leftChild equals
getChild index, true.
We pass true when we want the index of the left child,
and int rightChild equals getChild index, false,
and so, this gets us the left child
of the node at heap index,
and the right child of the node at heap index,
and now, we're going to make sure
that these indices are valid
because remember, if the node doesn't have a right child,
or doesn't have a left child,
then these calculations will actually give us indices
that are size n beyond.
So they'll return indices that aren't part of the heap,
and we know the last valid heap index is lastHeapIndex.
For this, we could just use size minus one as I said,
but you'll see, when we do the heapsort,
that we actually need this parameter.
So we're gonna say if leftChild is less than or equal
to lastHeapIndex,
that means that this node has a left child,
and so, now we're gonna test whether it has a right child,
so we're gonna say if
rightChild is greater than the lastHeapIndex,
then it does not have a right child.
So that's essentially saying that we calculated an index
for the right child that's outside the bounds of the heap,
and so in that case,
the child that we wanna swap is the left child
'cause this, if this condition passes,
it has a left child.
If this condition fails, it doesn't have a right child,
and so, in this case, we have a left child
but no right child,
so the childToSwap will equal the leftChild
'cause that's all there is.
Now if this condition fails,
it means that we also have a right child,
and so, in that case, we need to swap it
with the child that has the largest value,
so we're gonna say childToSwap equals
and we're gonna say heap leftChild
is greater
than heap rightChild,
then we wanna swap it with the leftChild.
Otherwise, we wanna swap with the rightChild,
and so, here, we're assigning childToSwap
with the index of the child that has the greatest value.
So if heap leftChild is greater than heap rightChild,
we're gonna assign the index of the leftChild
to the childToSwap.
Otherwise, it's gonna get the rightChild.
So we've assigned childToSwap,
but that doesn't mean we actually wanna swap the child
because we now need to compare the value at heap index
with the childToSwap value.
If the value at heap index is greater
than the childToSwap value, then we're done.
I mean, the parent is greater than the child.
We only need to swap if the value at index
is less than the child,
so we're gonna say if heap index
is less than heap
of the child that we're gonna potentially swap with,
then we do the swap.
So we say int tmp equals,
and I see the compiler's complaining here
that childToSwap might not have been initialised,
and that's because, I shouldn't have put this brace here.
This is still supposed to be taking place within here
because if the leftChild is greater than lastHeapIndex,
we're dealing with a value that doesn't have any children,
meaning there's nothing to swap.
So let me
reformat the code to get that in.
Okay, so let's continue,
so compiler's not complaining anymore.
So if the value, the replacement value,
is less than its largest child,
we wanna swap it with the largest child,
so we're gonna say int tmp equals
heap index,
and then, we're gonna say heap index
equals heap
childToSwap,
and the final step, of course, is heap childToSwap
equals tmp,
and so, we've now swapped the replacement value
with its largest child.
Now, if the replacement value
is greater than or equal to the child, our heap is good,
so we've finished heapifying the heap,
and so, in that case,
we wanna break out of the loop because we're done,
and then, we're gonna wanna rinse and repeat.
So now we wanna compare the replacement value
with its new children,
and the replacement value is now sitting
at index childToSwap because we just swapped it,
and we know we just swapped it
because if we haven't done any swapping,
we're gonna break out of the loop,
and so, the last thing we're gonna do in the loop
is say index equals childToSwap,
and now, we wanna end the loop,
and so, in the loop, what we're doing,
we're getting the two children of the element
at position index,
and when we first enter the loop,
that will be the index of
where we've put the replacement value,
so the index of where the value we deleted was,
and then, if, just do that,
and then, if the element in that position
doesn't have any children,
in fact, down here, on this if,
we're gonna say else,
break,
and that is actually the entire method,
and so, if the position that we're examining has children,
we may have some heapifying to do.
If it doesn't have children, we're done.
I mean, there's nothing underneath it,
so it's not possible for it to be less than its children.
It doesn't have any children,
and so, as long as the index we're looking at
is part of the heap,
we get the two children indices,
and then, we check to see if those indices
are actually part of the heap.
If they're not, then we're done
because we're actually dealing with a leaf.
If they are, or if at least the left child is,
we check for a right child.
If we have a left child but no right child,
then obviously by default,
we're gonna swap with the left child.
If this test passes, and if we have two children,
then we're going to wanna swap with the larger of the two,
and then, after we've decided which child
we'd wanna swap with,
we then compare the value at index
with the child we'd swap with,
and if the value is less than that child,
we do have to swap them.
If there's no swapping to be done,
if the value at heap index is greater or equal to its child,
we're done.
The heap is once again satisfying the heap property,
and so, we can break.
Otherwise, once we've done the swapping,
we now have to compare the replacement value
with its new children.
We've put the replacement value
into childToSwap at this point.
That's its new index,
and so we're gonna update index to that
and loop back around,
and we're gonna keep doing that
until we break out of the loop.
Now, if you're wondering here
why we're checking for a left child
and then for a right child,
then you might be thinking, well wait a minute.
What if the node has a right child but not a left child?
Well, that's not possible
because a heap has to be a complete tree,
and so, the only possibilities are
the node has two children or the node has a left child.
In a heap, we can't have a node that has no left child
but a right child,
because that would mean that we don't have a complete tree,
and that would mean we don't have a heap,
and so, we only have to worry about
we have a left child and a right child,
which is this case here,
or we have a left child but no right child,
in which case, by default,
we're gonna swap with the left child.
Okay, and that's it for fixHeapBelow.
So now that we have our fixHeapBelow method,
let's finish our delete method,
and so, here,
we're gonna say if index equals zero,
meaning we're dealing with the root, or
heap index
is less than
heap parent,
then we wanna fix the heap below,
Below, and we're gonna pass index,
and we're gonna pass size minus one.
So what we're saying here is if we're dealing with the root,
so if we, if the node we deleted was the root,
and so, the replacement value has gone into the root,
then obviously, we can only look down the tree,
and if the value, the replacement value,
is less than its parent,
that means we don't have to look up the tree
because we know this guy is then gonna be
less than everything above the tree,
and so, in this case,
we need to look at the tree below heap index
and potentially fix that,
and so, if it's the root, we can only look below,
and if the replacement value is less than its parent,
then we know above the replacement value is sound.
It meets the heap property,
and so, we're gonna go below.
Otherwise, we're gonna look above.
So we're gonna fixHeapAbove,
and in this case, we just need the index.
Once we've done that, so we've fixed our heap,
we need to decrement the size,
and then, of course,
we're gonna return our deletedValue,
and that's it.
So we come in.
If the heap is empty, we throw an exception.
Otherwise, we get the parent
and we store off the deleted value.
We get the replacement value
and put it where the deleted value used to be.
We then fix our heap.
We decrement the size 'cause we've deleted one node,
and then, we return the deleted value.
Okay, so while I'm in here,
I'm gonna add a printHeap method
so we can actually look at what's going on
after we've performed some operations.
I'll add it here.
So I'll say public void printHeap,
and this'll be straightforward 'cause we have an array,
so I'll say for int i equals zero,
i less than size, i plus plus,
and we'll say System.out.println heap i.
Actually, I'm gonna make this print,
so I'll all come out on one line,
and then I'll say System.out.print.
Put a comma in there, and then,
when we finish printing our heap,
I'll have a System.out.println
to print a new line,
and that's it for our printHeap method.
So now, let's go to our main method,
and let's start working with our heap.
So I'm gonna say Heap heap equals new heap,
and I'll give it a capacity of 10,
and now, we're gonna build the heap that we went over
in the delete slides.
So I'm gonna heap.insert, and we're gonna insert 80.
That's gonna be the root.
heap.insert 75,
heap.insert 60,
heap.insert 68,
heap.insert 55,
heap.insert 40,
only two more to go,
heap.insert 52,
and heap.insert 67.
So remember, when we're inserting,
we start at the root and then we do the,
go down to the next level and do the left and right child
and then go down to the next level
and fill in each level from left to right,
and so, this will build the heap that we saw in the slides.
All right, so let's print our heap,
heap.printHeap,
and before we start deleting nodes,
let's run and make sure we're building our heap properly.
All right, so we have 80, 75, 60,
68, 55, 40, 52, and 67.
So that's just the array printed out in order,
and that's the order that we expect.
So now, let's delete some nodes.
So let's say heap.delete,
and remember, we wanna give the index,
and so, let's give the index of 75
'cause we went through that on the slides,
so that's at index one,
and then, we'll print the heap again,
and we see that 75 is gone,
and now, 68 is the left child of 80,
and 60 is the right child,
and 67 has been moved below 68
'cause 67 would've been the replacement value
and brought up here,
and so, that's working fine.
So let's replace 40, so I'll change this to five,
and let's run now,
and we'll see that 40 is gone,
and we've got 80, 75, and 67,
so 67 is the right child of 80,
and then 68 and 55 are the children of 75,
and 60 and 52 are the children of 67,
and so, everything seems to be working fine.
We could try deleting the root just for fun.
Let's do that,
and the root's gone,
and so, 75 is now at the root.
It's got children 68 and 60.
68 has children 67 and 55,
and 60 has children 40 and 52,
and so, that's working fine,
and so, that's it for delete.
It's a matter of replacing the deleted value
with the right-most value and then fixing the heap,
either by looking up the heap or down the heap.
All right, we haven't written one last method,
and we'll do that in the next video.
It's gonna be a very quick video
because this will be getting the root node,
and it's, that's a very simple operation,
so I'll see you there.